Hi.
This is the lecture on negative controls.
So this is part of our discussion of
looking at statistically significant or
non-significant results and
adding meat to our hypothesis testing.
And in this case, what we're
concerned with is the problem of,
did the process that we
executed the hypothesis in,
was that what created the significance, or
was it a real intrinsically true effect?
Okay.
So let's restate the problem.
You're worried that your results are more
due to process than a real effect.
Well how do you check?
Well there's a lot of ways and a lot of
the mechanisms of statistical significance
are trying to check against that.
They're evaluating your results relative
to the uncertainty in your data and so on.
But this, what I'm about to present
is a very practical solution to that.
Just a real sort of more data
science-y way to think about it.
And the idea is to perform
a negative control.
And you're basically going
to repeat the study for
a variable that is known
to have no association.
So, let me give you a very famous
example in the area that I work in.
What everyone is talking about in
brain activation studies now,
is in this idea of connectivity.
That two different areas of the brain,
their brain activity tends
to track with one another.
And that's the idea of
so-called connectivity.
It's interesting to note that
what someone did at one point
is they used all these tools
that people like me and
other people that work in the area have
developed, and they looked at them
in an area of the brain where there
is no brain, the ventricles, okay?
So the in the ventricles there's
nothing but cerebral spinal fluid, so
there's nothing there.
And for two locations in the ventricles,
they used the same techniques that we
use for two locations in the brain
to study correlations or
connectivity as we like to call it.
And what they found is
significant results.
And that's an interesting finding
cuz there's no brain there, so
it's not brain conductivity they're
finding, it purely has to do with process.
And what they found out is that this
was due to a couple of interesting
artifactual components of the data.
One, it was due to sort of head motion.
As people move their head, it created
similar patterns in the two locations in
this area of the ventricles and
that caused correlations.
Those effects permeated the rest
of the image, so a lot of
what people were reporting as connectivity
was really due to head motion.
It's also true that as we breathe,
and as our heart beats,
that changes the character of
the signal dynamically and
those were also related to
creating spurious correlations.
The broader point, though,
is that what these investigators did
is they repeated an analysis
that everyone was excited about.
Everyone was excited about
finding remote correlations in
the brain that were
putatively brain networks and
understanding how they were related
to disease and stuff like that.
However, what these researchers did is,
they said okay let's just study
the process by looking at an instance
where we know that there can't be
an effect, but in every other sense,
we've replicated the analysis in exactly
the same way and they found an effect.
So these kinds of negative controls offer
a very simple way to investigate spurious
effects due to things like confounding or
multiplicity.
In this case, it was confounding.
The correlation between this two voxels is
actually confounded by head motion, for
example.
So what are the characteristics
of a good negative control?
Well, they're variables that are realistic
but known to have no association.
So in this case, they had a perfect one.
They had something that was in the image
already, that they could look at,
it was subject to all the same
processing experience that the rest of
the brain got and so this was a good
version of a negative control.
If there's one criticism of negative
control, it's often very hard to
find something where you know for
sure there can't possibly be an effect.
So another strategy that
people employ rather than
executing things like negative controls,
is they do things like permutation tests.
They actually formally break
the association by permuting one of
the variables so that there can't be
an association, they've broken it.
So that's a little bit more of an advance
of a topic, but the idea is quite similar.
So this is a simple technique.
And if you're feeling queasy about
a process that one of the people you're
managing went through, a very long,
complicated set of data munging and
analysis and several models being built,
ask them to just repeat the whole
process for something that is,
on face value, can't possibly exhibit
an association, and see what comes out.
And it's a great way to
offer a sanity check,
and to check influences due to process.